Blog Post for GSoC Building Jenkins.io with Alternative Tools (#6701)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2023/09/25/2023-09-25-building-jenkinsio-with-alternative-tools.adoc

---
:layout: post
:title: "GSoC Building Jenkins.io with alternative tools"
:tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2023
- jenkins.io
- jenkins-infra
:author: vandit1604
:sig: gsoc
description: >
  The Building Jenkins.io with Alternative Tools is a project under Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2023.
opengraph:
  image: /images/gsoc/opengraph.png
links:
  gitter: https://matrix.to/#/#jenkinsci_gsoc-2023-building-jenkinsio:matrix.org
---

This blog showcases all the work done in the project link:/projects/gsoc/2023/projects/alternative-jenkinsio-build-tool/[Building Jenkins.io with Alternative Tools] during Google Summer of Code 2023.

== Table of Content

. <<About Project>>
. Coding <<Phase 1>>
. Coding <<Phase 2>>
. <<Future Improvements>>
. <<Acknowledgments>>
. <<Useful Links>>

== About Project

> Jenkins.io is generated as a static website using Awestruct from AsciiDoc sources. One of the drawbacks of the current build method is that the technical documentation is not Versioned. It is thus not possible to view the documentation for a given Jenkins version. Only the latest can be viewed. This can lead to unnecessary confusion and is a worse experience than many other documentation sites like the git site, FreeBSD, and others.. Other drawback of Awestruct is that it is greatly under maintained since last two years and people from jenkins-infra are currently maintaining it. Relying on awestruct is not a good thing for a longer run. 

Reviewer: We generally prefer sentence per line formatting so that code review is easier.

I replaced the FreeBSD example with Python because I was unable to find a way to show multiple versions of the the current FreeBSD documentation.  They state that previous versions are available, but I did not find a link that would show previous versions of the FreeBSD documentation.

```suggestion
The link:/[Jenkins documentation site] is generated as a static website using Awestruct from AsciiDoc sources.
One of the drawbacks of the current build method is that the technical documentation is not versioned.
It is thus not possible to view the documentation for a given Jenkins version.
Only the latest can be viewed.
This can lead to unnecessary confusion and is a worse experience than many other documentation sites like the link:https://git-scm.com/docs/git[git site], link:https://docs.python.org/3.11/[Python[, and others.
Another drawback of Awestruct is that it is greatly under maintained in the last two years and people from jenkins-infra are currently maintaining it.
Relying on awestruct is not a good thing in the long run. 
```

The preferred set of tools that will replace Awestruct are https://antora.org/[Antora] for it's out of the box versioning functionality and https://www.gatsbyjs.com/[Gatsby] for it's super fast builds.

The migration was performed in the following 2 coding phases:

== Phase 1

In this phase, the following tasks were completed:

* I used Antora to migrate the User documentation which was versioned and Developer documentation which was non-versioned while keeping all the functionalities that we have on jenkins.io right now.
* I migrated Tutorials, Guides, Solution Pages which were all non-versioned.
* I fixed Interpage Linking across all the pages.

> You can watch me talk about the project in the https://youtu.be/W4eSVCTmqb8[Midterm Presentation here].

Reviewer: Easier for the reader if we open the video at exactly the time when your presentation starts.
```suggestion
You can watch me talk about the project in the link:https://youtu.be/W4eSVCTmqb8?t=1841Midterm Presentation here].
```

== Phase 2

In this phase, the following tasks were completed:

> * I used Strapi CMS with Gatsby. I would also have to integrate Git Workflow here which was not suggested by Mentors. Hence, It was not the perfect fit for Jenkins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* I used link:https://strapi.io/[Strapi CMS} with Gatsby. I would also have liked to integrate Git Workflow here which was not suggested by mentors. Hence, It was not the perfect fit for Jenkins.
```

> * I then moved to Gatsby and Developed the Blogs Feature.

Reviewer: Capitalization correction
```suggestion
* I then moved to Gatsby and developed the blogs feature.
```

* I developed other pages like LTS Changelog, LTS Weekly, Download page and many more.

> Here's the link to https://youtu.be/W4eSVCTmqb8[Midterm Presentation] where you can watch me talk about the project's second half.

Reviewer: I think that you want this link to be the second half video, not the first half video.
```suggestion
Here's the link to the link:https://youtu.be/M9_HPQwetMg?t=1153[Final Presentation] where you can watch me talk about the project's final phase.
```

== Future Improvements

> - Some pages like Changelogs, Pipeline step reference in documentation still need more refining and are missing some features that exist on the pages on Jenkins.io. I will be keep working on the project to refine them and make it ready as a whole to be called a drop-in replacement to Jenkins.io.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some pages like Changelogs, Pipeline step reference in documentation still need more refining and are missing some features that exist on the current documentation pages.
I will continue working on the project to refine them and make it ready as a drop-in replacement for Jenkins.io.
```

== Acknowledgments

> I'm grateful that I got the opportunity to contribute to Jenkins under Google Summer of Code. I can say with confidence that Jenkins taught me a lot and I love learning so I don't plan to stop contributing to Jenkins any soon. I was able to pull off the project to this extent only because of my mentors,link:/blog/authors/krisstern/[Kris Stern], link:/blog/authors/MarkEWaite/[Mark Waite], link:/blog/authors/iamrajiv/[Rajiv Ranjan Singh], link:/blog/authors/yiminggong/[Yiming Gong] constant support and guidance throughout the project. Because of their valuable feedback and insights into the project helped me a lot.

Reviewer: Use the author macro rather than making a link to the author.  Let the existing macros do more of the work.
```suggestion
I'm grateful that I got the opportunity to contribute to Jenkins under Google Summer of Code.
I can say with confidence that Jenkins taught me a lot and I love learning so I don't plan to stop contributing to Jenkins any soon.
I was able to pull off the project to this extent only because of my mentors, author:krisstern[Kris Stern], author:MarkEWaite[Mark Waite], author:iamrajiv[Rajiv Ranjan Singh], and author:yiminggong/[Yiming Gong].
I am grateful for their constant support and guidance throughout the project.
Their valuable feedback and insights into the project helped me a lot.
```

> I would also like to thank the org admins, link:/blog/authors/jmmeessen[Jean-Marc Meessen] for being a warm, father-like figure to me, link:/blog/authors/alyssat[Alyssa Tong] for always making sure the meetings and the Project Demos go smoothly , link:/blog/authors/krisstern/[Kris Stern] for always micro-managing tasks for all of the contributors, and link:/blog/authors/gounthar/[Bruno Verachten] for always checking up on me and all the other contributors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would also like to thank the org admins, author:jmmeessen[Jean-Marc Meessen] for being a warm, father-like figure to me, author:alyssat[Alyssa Tong] for always making sure the meetings and the Project Demos go smoothly , author:krisstern[Kris Stern] for deep involvement in resolving development challenges. and author:gounthar[Bruno Verachten] for always checking up on me and all the other contributors. 
```

---
:layout: post
:title: "GSoC Building Jenkins.io with alternative tools"
:tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2023
- jenkins.io
- jenkins-infra
:author: vandit1604
:sig: gsoc
description: >

>   The Building Jenkins.io with Alternative Tools is a project under Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Building Jenkins.io with Alternative Tools is a project under Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2023.
```

opengraph:
  image: /images/gsoc/opengraph.png
links:
  gitter: https://matrix.to/#/#jenkinsci_gsoc-2023-building-jenkinsio:matrix.org
---

This blog showcases all the work done in the project link:/projects/gsoc/2023/projects/alternative-jenkinsio-build-tool/[Building Jenkins.io with Alternative Tools] during Google Summer of Code 2023.

> == Table of Content

Reviewer: Contents is usually plural
```suggestion
== Table of Contents
```

. <<About Project>>
. Coding <<Phase 1>>
. Coding <<Phase 2>>
. <<Future Improvements>>
. <<Acknowledgments>>
. <<Useful Links>>

== About Project

The link:/[Jenkins documentation site] is generated as a static website using Awestruct from AsciiDoc sources.
One of the drawbacks of the current build method is that the technical documentation is not versioned.
It is thus not possible to view the documentation for a given Jenkins version.
Only the latest can be viewed.

> This can lead to unnecessary confusion and is a worse experience than many other documentation sites like the link:https://git-scm.com/docs/git[git site], link:https://docs.python.org/3.11/[Python[, and others.

Reviewer: Correct a mistake that I made in my earlier suggestion
```suggestion
This can lead to unnecessary confusion and is a worse experience than many other documentation sites like the link:https://git-scm.com/docs/git[git site], link:https://docs.python.org/3.11/[Python], and others.
```

> Another drawback of Awestruct is that it is greatly under maintained in the last two years and people from jenkins-infra are currently maintaining it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another drawback of Awestruct is that for the last two years it has only been maintained by people from the Jenkins project.
```

> Relying on awestruct is not a good thing in the long run. 

Reviewer: Consistent capitalization.
```suggestion
Relying on Awestruct is not a good thing in the long run. 
```

> The preferred set of tools that will replace Awestruct are https://antora.org/[Antora] for it's out of the box versioning functionality and https://www.gatsbyjs.com/[Gatsby] for it's super fast builds.

Reviewer: Possessive of "it" is "its" while the contraction of "it is" is "it's".  Refer to the [grammarly page](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/its-vs-its/#:~:text=The%20difference%20between%20its%20and%20it's&text=Here's%20the%20rub%3A%20its%20(without,it%20is%20or%20it%20has.) for more details
```suggestion
The preferred set of tools that will replace Awestruct are https://antora.org/[Antora] for its out of the box versioning functionality and https://www.gatsbyjs.com/[Gatsby] for it's super fast builds.
```

The migration was performed in the following 2 coding phases:

== Phase 1

In this phase, the following tasks were completed:

> * I used Antora to migrate the User documentation which was versioned and Developer documentation which was non-versioned while keeping all the functionalities that we have on jenkins.io right now.

Reviewer: I think that readers might misunderstand and think that phase 1 completed the replacement of all the existing jenkins.io functionality.  Consider this as alternate wording.
```suggestion
* I used Antora to migrate the user documentation which was versioned and the developer documentation which was non-versioned while keeping much of the functionality that we already have on jenkins.io.
```

> * I migrated Tutorials, Guides, Solution Pages which were all non-versioned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* I migrated Tutorials, Guides, and Solution Pages which were all non-versioned.
```

* I fixed Interpage Linking across all the pages.

> You can watch me talk about the project in the link:https://youtu.be/W4eSVCTmqb8?t=1841[Midterm Presentation here].

Reviewer: A few more words to assure readers know that this video discusses phase 1 results.  Also, I like it when a video link is immediately followed by an embedded copy of the video.  However, that is a personal preference and you are welcome to not include that embedded copy of the video.
```suggestion
You can watch me talk about phase 1 of the project in the link:https://youtu.be/W4eSVCTmqb8?t=1841[midterm presentation here].

video::W4eSVCTmqb8[youtube, start=1841, width=839, height=473, role=center]
```

== Phase 2

In this phase, the following tasks were completed:

* I used link:https://strapi.io/[Strapi CMS] with Gatsby. I would also have liked to integrate Git Workflow here which was not suggested by mentors. Hence, It was not the perfect fit for Jenkins.
* I then moved to Gatsby and developed the blogs feature.
* I developed other pages like LTS Changelog, LTS Weekly, Download page and many more.

> Here's the link to the link:https://youtu.be/M9_HPQwetMg?t=1153[Final Presentation] where you can watch me talk about the project's final phase.

Reviewer: Consider embedding the video viewer frame here as well
```suggestion
Here's the link to the link:https://youtu.be/M9_HPQwetMg?t=1153[Final Presentation] where you can watch me talk about the project's final phase.

video::W4eSVCTmqb8[youtube, start=1153, width=800, height=420, role=center]
```

== Future Improvements

> - Some pages like Changelogs, Pipeline step reference in documentation still need more refining and are missing some features that exist on the current documentation pages.

Reviewer: Since there are only two items in the list, we can join them with "and".
```suggestion
- Some pages like changelogs and the Pipeline steps reference still need more refining and are missing some features that exist on the current documentation pages.
```
